Let's test some custom hooks.
So I'm gonna create a new file here and
call this use inside of
tests useBreedList.test.js.
Okay, here we're going to, so we wrote
a custom hook in the complete intro
to React that requests a breed
list based on what an animal was.
And it gets that from an API.
So one of the things that's interesting
about this is it makes an API
request that we're gonna have to somehow
all fake out, or mock as it were.
So let's start writing our test first.
We're gonna import expect and
test from @jest/globals.
We're going to import render
from @testing-library, and
we're going to import useBreedList
from ../useBreedList.
Now, a couple things here.
We're trying to test a hook, right?
And hooks always exist in components, so
you can't test them outside of components.
What do we do about that?
Well, we can actually get
kinda clever about it.
We can write a function here called
getBreedList that takes in an animal.
And then we can write a basically
a fake component inside of
function testComponent.
Cuz remember anything that returns markup,
or
is a React node compatible
thing is a React node, right?
So I'm gonna say list = use breedList
(list) and have this return null,
cuz remember, null is something
valid that you can render in React.
So now this testComponent,
this needs to be animal, testComponent,
technically a valid React component,
right?
And I'm just gonna grab that list here and
then save it outside of that.
Here, I'm going to
render my testComponent.
And then here I'm going to return list.
So I wrote a helper function that's
actually going to go create a React
component, render it, and
get the list out of there,
using all of React's life cycles.
It's kinda strange,
I know, but it does work.
So let's try that.
Let's make this smaller so
you can see more what's going on.
All right, so we're gonna say test.
Gives an empty list with no animal, right?
Because we want it to always
give some sort of array back.
AlI right,
this empty array is more accurate.
Okay, async function we're gonna say
const BreedList status = getBreedList.
Okay and then I'm gonna say
expect(BreedList) to have length 0 and
expect(status) to be unloaded, right?
Because if you haven't
done anything with it,
if you haven't actually reached out to
the API yet, it's gonna be unloaded.
It's gonna be uninitialized basically.
And there you go, that passes.
So that this works okay because we didn't
we're not actually hitting the API, right?
We're actually hitting fetch,
right,because we don't give it an animal
it doesn't actually reach out to the API.
Now we can actually make
this a little bit easier.
There's a thing called testing
library/react hooks, so
they don't have to do all
this black magic here.
It'll do the black magic for
you, it's basically doing this.
But let's go ahead and
install it, so I'm gonna, oops.
If I hit q here, it'll actually
stop my test suite from running.
And then I can say npm install -D
@testing-library testing-library.
And I wanna install react-hooks@5.1.0,
Okay, cool,
we're put Jest back in watch mode.
And then I'm gonna come up here and
underneath this I'm gonna say import,
renderHook from
@testing-library/react-hooks.
This is basically gonna do this for
us, and
it's just gonna make this
look a little bit nicer.
So instead of doing that getBreedList
stuff, cuz I hate writing a bunch of logic
to test something else cuz I feel like
I'm re-implementing a bunch of stuff.
And I feel like I need tests from
my test at that point, right?
So instead I'm going to say render-hook,
and
it's just a function that takes in
useBreedList of whatever I wanna get.
Undefined is not a function.
Yeah, here that's fine.
Okay, and then I need to say,
const[BreedList,
status] = result like that.
Getting closer, what is result?
Result is not iterable.
Let's see what did we do here.
>> .current on result.
>> .current on result, thank you.
So results gives you back
some other things besides
just the results, right,
the current result.
So you do have to pull the current
one out of there, yep, thank you.
Cool, and now we have a passing test.
This is much easier to read than that
function test component business that
we were doing.
This is a really nice
helper to help you do that.
All right, so that's testing a hook.
Now we need to go mock that API so
that if we give it something like dog here
that it's not actually gonna
request against my API, right?
It's actually going to go and
do some sort of mocking result there.
AIl right, so let's go in and do that.
Let's go ahead and
quit out of our watcher here.
We're gonna do npm install -D,
jest fetch mock@3.0.3.
This is a tool that's actually
gonna help us just mock fetch.
So mock is a term that basically says,
here's a fake implementation of that.
So what it's gonna do is it's going
to replace the browser fetch that
it expects to have.
And it's gonna replace that with a
implementation that we're going to provide
to it so
that we can provide it with fake data.
So it never has to hit our API.
It's a good idea,
your tests run all the time.
APIs are slow, you don't wanna
hammer your API, just a better for
everyone if you mock that.
Okay, run my tests again, maybe it
actually we'll wait a second for that.
So in your package.json,
just down here at the bottom,
put another top level thing called jest.
This is like configuration for
jest, 1automock false.
We don't wanna it to, you can have it
say like mock everything by default.
That's what it used to do,
it was terribly annoying.
And we're gonna have a setup files.
And one of them that we're gonna
have a run is ./src/setupjest.js.
So we're gonna have it run this
before it runs the testing suite.
And then we can enable
some of those mocks.
So we just added this,
the jest automock false.
Okay, we're gonna create a new file
here called setupjest.js that's
gonna go in the source directory.
Not the test directory cuz we don't
want jest to think of that's a test cuz
it's not.
And really short here, we're gonna import
enableFetchMocks from jest-fetch-mock.
And then we're just gonna run
that enableFetchMocks, that's it.
Now, here you can actually go in
through and make an entire mock API.
I kind of like doing
it closer to the test.
In the test, here's what this
particular test is expecting so
I can see everything in one test.
Personal preference,
there's not a wrong or right answer there.
Okay, so now we have that,
let's go back to our useBreedList.
We're gonna make a new test
down here at the bottom.
That's what we're testing,
useBreedListTest,
I want to say test gives
back breeds with an animal.
It's an async function.
I wanna say const breeds = and
just give it like a list of
some breeds like Havanese,
Bichon frise, Poodle, and I don't know,
Corgi or something like that.
Then I'm gonna say fetch.mockResponseOnce.
So the next time that jest fetch
gets called respond with this and
I'm just gonna say json.stringify,
Animal, dog, and breeds.
So this is a fetch response that this
particular thing would expect to see.
And then what I can do here is I can say,
const result waitForNextUpdate
= renderHook.
UseBreedList with dog.
So what this waitForNextUpdate is gonna do
is like, okay, something's gonna happen
and then you gotta wait for
this to update and then we can test it.
So it's gonna give you back basically a
promise of you gotta wait something async
is gonna happen.
So I'm gonna say await
waitForNextUpdate like this.
This is going to say, okay,
I'm gonna get something back, wait for
something to happen.
Then we can continue the test
after this point and
now I can say const BreedList
status = result.current.
I can say expect(status) toBe(loaded),
right?
Because it's gone to the API and
come back.
And I expect BreedList = breeds, right?
Whatever I gave it here to respond with,
that's what I expect to get back here.
All right, save that,
now we're gonna say npm run jest or
test watch.
And you can see here,
all of my tests pass.
So again, I always like to make sure
that things fail when I expect them to.
So let's say I go into useBreedList and
I'm going to say that setBreedList
here is gonna just be,
And you can see here, now it fails.
This is like, hey, I expected to get
these back and you gave me back lol hi,
good job.
So that's good, and
then what happens if I say nothing here?
Again, I expected loaded and
I got nothing, right?